.TH ZAP 1 "2026-05-30" "zapper 2.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
zap \- local Markdown search engine
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B zap
[\fB--index\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fIKEYWORD\fR
.br
.B zap
[\fB--index\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fBsearch\fR
[\fB--limit\fR \fIN\fR]
[\fIKEYWORD\fR]
.br
.B zap
[\fB--index\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fBindex\fR
[\fB--root\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--all\fR]
.br
.B zap
[\fB--index\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fBwatch\fR
[\fB--root\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--all\fR]
[\fB--debounce-ms\fR \fIMS\fR]
[\fB--poll-seconds\fR \fISECONDS\fR]
.br
.B zap
[\fB--index\fR \fIPATH\fR]
[\fB--config\fR \fIPATH\fR]
\fBserve\fR
[\fB--bind\fR \fIADDR:PORT\fR]
[\fB--token\fR \fITOKEN\fR]
[\fB--host-label\fR \fIHOST\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B zap
indexes local Markdown files and searches them with literal,
case-insensitive keyword matching.
.PP
By default,
.B index
and
.B watch
focus on common workspace Markdown locations:
.B ~/*.md,
.B ~/*/*.md,
and
.B ~/*/memo/**/*.md.
Use
.B --all
to include every Markdown file under the root.
These defaults can be changed with
.B ~/.config/zapper/config.json.
.PP
The
.B search
subcommand is the default. For example,
.B zap agent-post
is equivalent to
.B zap search agent-post.
.PP
When no keyword argument is supplied to
.B search
and standard input is not a terminal,
.B zap
reads the search keyword from standard input. This allows pipe usage such as:
.PP
.RS
printf 'agent-post' | zap --limit 5
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B search [--limit N] [KEYWORD]
Search the current index. Output is tab-separated:
full path, 1-based line number, 1-based character position, and line text.
Use
.B --remote URL --remote-token TOKEN
to include a token-protected remote zapper API. Use
.B --no-local
to show only remote results. Remote paths are printed as
.B HOST:/path/to/file.md.
.TP
.B index [--root PATH] [--all]
Build or rebuild the Markdown index for a directory tree.
.TP
.B watch [--root PATH] [--all] [--debounce-ms MS] [--poll-seconds SECONDS]
Build the index and keep it updated. By default this uses filesystem
notifications and watches only directories needed by the default include
patterns. With
.B --poll-seconds,
the tree is scanned periodically.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --index PATH
Use a custom index file path. The default is
.B $XDG_DATA_HOME/zapper/index.json
or
.B ~/.local/share/zapper/index.json.
.TP
.B --config PATH
Use a custom JSON config file. The default is
.B ~/.config/zapper/config.json
when that file exists.
.TP
.B --limit N
Limit the number of search results. The default is 200.
.TP
.B --root PATH
Directory tree to index or watch. The default is the current directory.
.TP
.B --all
Index or watch every Markdown file under the root instead of the default
workspace patterns.
.TP
.B --bind ADDR:PORT
Address for
.B serve
to listen on. The default is
.B 127.0.0.1:8765.
.TP
.B --token TOKEN
Bearer token for
.B serve.
It may also be supplied with
.B ZAP_API_TOKEN
or the config key
.B api_token.
.TP
.B --host-label HOST
Host label returned by
.B serve
and used as the remote path prefix.
.TP
.B --tls-cert PATH
Certificate file for HTTPS
.B serve.
.TP
.B --tls-key PATH
Private key file for HTTPS
.B serve.
.TP
.B --remote-ca-cert PATH
CA or self-signed certificate file used to verify an HTTPS remote API.
.SH CONFIG
The config file is JSON. Supported keys are:
.B root,
.B index,
.B all,
.B include_patterns,
.B watch_patterns,
.B api_token,
.B host_label,
.B tls_cert,
.B tls_key,
and
.B remotes.
.PP
Example:
.PP
.RS
.nf
{
  "root": "/home/vagrant",
  "index": "/home/vagrant/.local/share/zapper/index.json",
  "all": false,
  "include_patterns": ["~/*.md", "~/*/*.md", "~/*/memo/**/*.md"],
  "watch_patterns": ["~", "~/*", "~/*/memo", "~/*/memo/**"],
  "api_token": "server-token",
  "host_label": "this-host",
  "tls_cert": "/home/vagrant/.config/zapper/this-host.crt",
  "tls_key": "/home/vagrant/.config/zapper/this-host.key",
  "remotes": [
    {
      "endpoint": "https://other-host:8765/search",
      "token": "remote-token",
      "host": "other-host",
      "ca_cert": "/home/vagrant/.config/zapper/other-host.crt"
    }
  ]
}
.fi
.RE
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Build an index:
.B zap index --root /home/vagrant
.TP
Search with the default subcommand:
.B zap agent-post
.TP
Search from a pipe:
.B printf 'agent-post' | zap --limit 5
.TP
Run a polling watcher:
.B zap watch --root /home/vagrant --poll-seconds 10
.TP
Serve the search API:
.B ZAP_API_TOKEN=secret zap serve --bind 0.0.0.0:8765 --host-label host1 --tls-cert host1.crt --tls-key host1.key
.TP
Search a remote API:
.B zap search agent-post --remote https://host1:8765/search --remote-token secret --remote-ca-cert host1.crt
.TP
Index every Markdown file under the root:
.B zap index --root /home/vagrant --all
.SH API
.B zap serve
provides
.B GET /health
and
.B GET /search?q=KEYWORD&limit=N.
.B /search
requires either
.B Authorization: Bearer TOKEN
or
.B X-Zap-Token: TOKEN.
Remote endpoints currently support
.B https://host:port/search.
Plain HTTP remote API transport is not supported.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.local/share/zapper/index.json
Default index file.
.TP
.B /usr/local/share/man/man1/zap.1
Installed manual page.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grep (1),
.BR systemd (1)
